[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi,
this is Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
We are coming to you live
from Boulder, Colorado
at the Gaiam studios
here in Boulder.
So today, we're talking about
stress and how to reduce it.
And we're going to be doing some
exercises later on in the show
specifically about how
to obtain coherence
and also how to reduce
stress in your life.
We're going to be talking about
the scientific connections
between the heart and the brain.
Joining me is Howard Martin.
He's the executive vice
president of HeartMath.
He's also the author of
"The HeartMath Solution."
And he's on the steering
committee for the Global
Coherence Initiative.
Thank you so much
for joining me today.
>>HOWARD MARTIN:
Well, Lisa, it's
a pleasure to be here with
you in the Gaiam studios
out here in the beautiful snow
covered Rocky Mountains today.
>>LISA: I know.
It's beautiful out today.
>>MARTIN: It's been a great day.
>>LISA: This is what
stress is about.
It's about anxiety.
It's about things crashing that
you are out of control with.
There's a lot of things
that go along with stress.
So exactly what does
stress do to the body?
>>MARTIN: Well,
it's debilitating
really, too much stress.
I mean, we can have a
certain natural amount
of stress in life.
But if it's ongoing,
if it's chronic,
it's very debilitating
to health.
Stress releases
hormones into our body
that, in excessive amounts,
just aren't good for us.
Things like cortisol
and adrenaline,
too much of that's just
not a healthy thing.
>>LISA: And then you
burn out the adrenals,
and you go into the fight or--
it's like we're constantly
in fear of the tiger.
>>MARTIN: That's correct.
And the nervous system,
autonomic nervous system
goes into a state of fatigue.
That leads to a host of
other medical problems.
And then at a
psychological level,
really, I think it's robbing
us of the quality of life.
We live in a society today when
there's just a lot of stress.
And it's unavoidable
in some ways.
But there are things we can
do to reduce it in other ways.
>>LISA: What are some of
the main sources of stress
that I'm seeing here?
What are the ways that
people experience stress?
>>MARTIN: Well, there's
two major things
that show up in most
stress surveys as number
one and number two.
The first one is the feeling
of not having enough time.
And I think if
you're anybody who's
listening can relate to that.
Does it feel like you just
can't get it all done?
There's not enough time.
There's too much to do.
This person's comment was my
workload has doubled, you know,
for example.
These are things that are real.
So that feeling of not
having enough time.
The second is the feeling
of not being in control.
>>LISA: The feeling of not
having choices and not--
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
Your world is spinning
out of control.
I can't control it.
These things are
happening to me.
>>LISA: It's happening outside.
>>MARTIN: I can do
nothing about it.
You know, I have a job that
I hate but I can't quit.
These are examples of
just not having control.
>>LISA: That's also the global
economic situation and what
we're dealing with in our
political environments
and so forth.
Yeah.
>>MARTIN: The thing about stress
is people sometimes don't see
is that it's not just
the external things.
It's our perception of external
things that create the stress.
But more importantly, this
is where it gets interesting,
it's the emotional
reactions we are
having to the perceptions
that we're having of stress.
So I just said that the two
major things that show up
on surveys as a
source of stress are
the feeling of not
having enough time
and the feeling of
not being in control.
>>LISA: Well, then
Anthony here on Twitter
basically says that it is
real, that people are laid off
and that he is doing
the work of 10 people.
That's real.
>>MARTIN: That's real.
So he can't change that.
The one thing that he can change
is his emotional reactions
to it.
You know, what is
he feeling inside?
Not saying that's easy.
I have tremendous compassion
for Anthony and all the people
out there who are
going through a lot
of extra stress in their life.
It's endemic of our time.
And at the same time,
that's the solution really.
We're not going to
change all the externals.
We're in this high speed
era right now where
things are very volatile.
So we're not going to be able
to change all these things.
Our best option is to learn
to change from the inside out.
>>LISA: What is
the significance?
And how does heart
play into all of this?
What's that connection between
the heart and the brain?
>>MARTIN: Well, our work
at HeartMath for years
is really implementing
a heart-based system
consisting of methods,
tools, and technology
all designed to empower people
during these changing times.
>>LISA: Oh good.
>>MARTIN: It's what we do there.
>>LISA: That's what we
need, empowerment, yes.
>>MARTIN: That's exactly what
we've been doing for 20 years
now.
And heart's been
around for a long time
if you think about it.
Thousands of years,
people talked
about heart and referenced
heart in these glowing ways.
And yet, in modern
society, we often
find ourselves
disconnected from that,
sort of living life
from the neck up
of what heart really is.
So to me, what heart
is it's physiological.
We certainly know about its
cardiovascular function.
And I'll share some
things in a minute
about what it does at
a physiological level
that people don't realize.
It's also an emotional heart.
The words like love,
care, compassion--
>>LISA: Gratitude.
>>MARTIN: --gratitude,
appreciation--
>>LISA: That's my favorite.
>>MARTIN: --those things always
come fit together with heart.
So there's an emotional side
of what heart really is.
There's a spiritual
connection that we have that
comes through heart where we
really connect to something
larger than our ordinary self.
And it comes in through
really to me from heart.
And taken back around,
it's that part of us where
our authentic self comes from.
>>LISA: This is the thing
that reduces the stress here
is getting in contact
with that space.
>>MARTIN: That's right.
It's an intelligence we have.
We call it heart
intelligence at HeartMath.
It's this magnificent
intelligence
that we were all born with.
It's there all the time.
We get disconnected from it.
We start living our
life from the neck up.
We cut ourselves
off from something
that's part of who we are
and essential to living
a meaningful and
fulfilling life.
The methods, techniques, and
things we have at HeartMath
are just designed to
reconnect you with that.
And when you do, life
can get better quicker.
>>LISA: Do you ever notice where
you're traveling around or even
looking if you go
to a restaurant,
everyone's on their phones.
And they're just looking
at this device, which
has so many fun
bells and whistles,
instead of connecting
to each other.
If people are standing in
an unfamiliar environment,
it's like an instant reaction.
Rather than connecting and
communicating with humans,
which might be dangerous
and I don't know ,
it's the instant
defense mechanism.
>>MARTIN: That's
just one example
of the way we are
living our lives now.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MARTIN: It's not
necessarily all bad.
But I'm just saying
it's part of the habits
that we've developed.
But many people now are
getting on to the fact
that they can't go on living
the ways in which they've
been living.
And that's actually positive.
That's motivation.
That's part of this era
that's been generically called
by many the shift.
As people are
starting to change,
starting to want
things to be different,
starting to develop new
capacities within themselves to
manifest the changes
that they want.
So it's a time, as I
said, of great opportunity
as well as all these
challenges that we face.
I'm both a pragmatist
and an optimist.
>>LISA: So the heart
has a frequency.
And the frequency
communicates from the heart
to the brain, the
heart to the brain.
And this is the place where
the coherence is potentially
achieved, right?
>>MARTIN: So at
Institute of HeartMath,
and the brilliant
researchers we have there
for years have
been doing research
understanding the heart's
role beyond its cardiovascular
function.
And their research
combined with research
that they found scattered
in research literature
around the world that's painted
a really interesting picture
of what heart at a
physical level is.
It's an information
processing center in our body.
It communicates with us.
>>LISA: Not the brain?
>>MARTIN: Well,
the brain certainly
is the information
processing center.
But so is the heart.
The heart sends
information to the brain
and the rest of the body.
Brain function is actually
critically dependent,
for example, upon
this information.
>>LISA: So it sends to the brain
instead of the brain sending
to the heart?
>>MARTIN: The brain's sending
information down to the heart,
controlling timing
of the heartbeat.
But the heart is sending
a lot of information
back to the brain.
One way it does it is through
a neurological communication.
There's actually
a nervous system
in the heart, studied
through the field of what's
called neuro cardiology.
It's a very sophisticated
nervous system.
It communicates with
the brain and the head
through a nerve
pathway starting here
that then travels
into the brain,
terminates up our higher
perceptual thinking centers,
neocortex.
And there's a constant
neurological conversation
happening between
heart and brain.
>>LISA: Feedback.
>>MARTIN: When researchers map
out the neurological activity
in the body, they can see that
there's more information being
sent to the brain from
the heart than it ever
receives from the brain.
And that's an
interesting phenomenon,
something I didn't know.
>>LISA: More information
from the heart?
>>MARTIN: It communicates things
like the blood pressure way.
The heart is actually
producing hormones.
These are all new discoveries
showing that the heart is
doing more than pumping blood.
>>LISA: Are we
addicted to stress?
>>MARTIN: We're addicted to
stimulation for one thing.
And many people perceive
stress as something
that you have to have,
that you won't be good
if you don't have
it, that you won't
perform unless you're stressed.
>>LISA: It's a driver.
Mm-hmm.
>>MARTIN: There's a term that
our founder at HeartMath,
Institute of HeartMath,
Doc Childre, has.
He says, there's a
difference between stress
and creative resistance energy.
Creative resistance energy would
be stepping up to another level
to meet a task that makes
you better, expands you
beyond your mediocrity, so that
you have some stress associated
with that.
You have something you have to
do that's unfamiliar to you,
but you have to sort of go
that next level within yourself
and make it happen.
That's different than
just this ongoing grind
of stress of emotional
reactions to this and that,
anxiety about things, and anger
about things, and frustration.
>>LISA: Well, it creates
that, as you said,
cortisol reaction, which
then could stimulate you
into action.
And I could see how it
could be an addiction.
You have a reaction
to something.
It creates adrenaline.
And then you fight
towards that reaction.
And then you fight to it.
And then you get
things done that way.
And it becomes an
addictive pattern.
>>MARTIN: Sure.
But here's the way I look at it.
So you can change
your emotional--
I call it your emotional diet.
People get addicted to
the stress emotions.
They get addicted to feeling
anxious or mad, things
like that.
And it's producing hormones
that they get accustomed to.
When you become more
heart-centric in the way
you live, and you
begin to really feel
emotions like appreciation and
gratitude and care and love
and those kind of
things, what happens
is you begin to desire those
so much more that you have
the motivation to replace those
other emotions that are more
draining, certainly harder
on your body and on your life
really.
And you learn to develop a
new sort of emotional diet
like what I call you know?
>>LISA: That's what we're
talking about today.
>>MARTIN: Exactly.
>>LISA: So what are
some of the ways
and explain the science
behind the heart's field,
that resonance that comes out
of the heart and heals us.
Yeah.
>>MARTIN: Well, the
ways I mentioned before
about heart communicating,
its intelligence
were biological pathways,
hardwired biology.
But the heart also does
things a bit differently.
And the heart is an
electrical organ.
It's an energy producing organ.
It produces by far the
source of bioelectricity
we have in our
body, 40 to 60 times
stronger than what
the brain produces.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: It goes to
every single cell.
Now the signal is strong
enough that it radiates
beyond our skin out
into space creating
an electromagnetic field that
surrounds us in 360 degrees.
Now I'm not talking about an
aura or about subtle energy.
Those things may exist.
But what I'm talking
about right now
is very measurable
electromagnetic energy.
>>LISA: An actual frequency
like a radio wave?
>>MARTIN: Like radio
waves, exactly.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: Now this
field extends beyond.
In "The HeartMath
Solution" that I
had the honor of writing
with Doc Childre,
we reported on another
clinic's findings
that said they'd measured
it eight to 10 feet away.
>>LISA: Eight to 10 feet?
>>MARTIN: Researchers at
the Institute of HeartMath
will stand behind
three to four feet.
But nonetheless, we're
producing this field.
So right now, our fields--
>>LISA: Are intermingling, yes.
>>MARTIN: You and I are
commingling right now.
>>LISA: So when you come into
a room with your loved ones,
your energy field will start to
intermingle before you actually
do.
Or if you're in--
that makes a lot of sense.
So if you're a work
environment and you
come into the field
of someone who's
maybe having anxiety
or stress, you
can feel that as you
walk into the room.
>>MARTIN: You very possibly can.
This may be one
way to explain it.
What's interesting
is that the energy
in the field, the
frequencies or the radio
stations in the field, do
change depending upon what
we're feeling emotionally.
If we're experiencing a strong
negative emotion, for example,
like frustration
or anger, it will
produce what's called
an incoherent spectra,
a lot of frequencies,
but they're not
working harmoniously.
If we are experiencing, for
example, a feeling of gratitude
and it was sincere or
a feeling of care that
was really genuine,
then the field changes.
We produce more of what's
called a harmonic spectra.
So there's harmony in the field.
And we're sending
this out all the time.
So in a sense,
through out heart,
we're broadcasting our emotions.
Now this is where the inquiry
gets interesting to me.
Because now we go beyond
biology and we're into physics.
How does my field relate
to the field in my brain?
How does my field
and your field,
how are we relating now
at an energetic level?
Beyond that, how does the
collective field of humanity
relate?
And then how does the
collective field of humanity
relate to the fields that
the Earth naturally produces?
Like the gentleman who sent us
a message earlier about he's
working twice as
many hours, his job's
in jeopardy, whatever
those things are,
those are big things.
And I have understanding
and compassion.
They are stressful.
And I'm not saying, you just
do a heart technique and, poof,
they go away.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: But you can learn to
make peace with things better.
And as you do it on the little
things, moment to moment, day
to day, the little common
irritations and frustrations,
as you turn those
around, as you make
an internal emotional
shift in yourself
and don't go through the
same predictable patterns
all the time, you begin
to accumulate energy.
That builds up into
what we call resilience.
And that begins to create a
buffer that makes things easier
to deal with.
And even the big things
get easier to deal with.
>>LISA: How do you develop
a resource of resilience
in your body?
>>MARTIN: Well, you have
to look at it this way.
We are energy systems.
We accumulate and deplete
energy, kind of like batteries.
And we have physical,
mental, emotional energy.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: When we experience
a lot of negative emotions,
we allow those
things to run, we're
bleeding off a lot of our
emotional energy reserves,
for example.
It' just draining us.
>>LISA: Draining us, yeah.
>>MARTIN: If we stop
that, if we learn
how to stop that
or at least arrest
it earlier and then shift it
to where we're experiencing
something that is more
positive and regenerative,
then we're adding
energy back into that.
We're recharging the battery.
So it becomes simple math.
You know?
If you add more energy
than you deplete,
your resilience increases.
If you continue to
bleed off more energy
than you're putting
in, resilience
is going to decrease.
Resilience is interesting.
It's not just the
ability to bounce back.
That's one of the
things that resilience
is is the ability to
come back quicker.
But when you have
your resilience level
up another level, it
does create a buffer
that does sort of,
in a sense, offer
some protection from the
stressors that would normally
get us.
And it all comes from
what we're doing.
But again, it's the little
things that count today.
And then when the
big things come up,
we can deal with them better.
>>LISA: So you build
resilience by practice?
>>MARTIN: You do it by practice.
And you do it by
practicing, again,
on the things that
you can see and doing
what you can see
that's real to you
and learning to make shifts.
Heroes to me are people that
I watch bend an attitude.
You know like--
>>LISA: What's that?
>>MARTIN: You can see,
well, you can see them,
they're going to go one way.
They're going to get
mad about something.
And you see them stop.
You see them gather them self.
And you see them
go to a place where
they begin to become
more neutral about it
and then maybe even turn
it all the way around.
When I see that happen,
when I see a person do that,
that's inspirational to me.
Because what I see that
as is the real work that
leads to the rest of the
things that people really
want in their lives.
And so I'm proud of
people that do that.
And I feel good about
myself when I do that.
>>LISA: I really want to
get into the whole part
about coherence.
But I want to recognize
George on Facebook that's
talking about how to deal
with the death of a loved one
and how that causes
massive stress, especially
around the holiday time.
At any time, it's
difficult. So with still
honoring the death
of a loved one,
how do you deal with
that type of a stress?
>>MARTIN: Gosh, that's
a really tough one.
And I understand, George, what
you're asking about there.
You know, you have to-- that's
a very personal decision.
You have to allow yourself to
feel the things that you need
to feel about that and
to allow that to unfold
in a natural process.
At a certain point,
I think people
recognize when
it's time for them
to sort of move on from that.
But it's so personal
that I don't really
address it that much.
Because each person's
situation in that context
is so very, very different.
>>LISA: I'm sure you've
been asked that before.
>>MARTIN: And the
compassion thing,
you know compassion
for yourself,
whatever you're feeling.
If George is personally
affected by this,
let me say to you,
George, self-compassion
is one of the most important
things you can do right now.
Understand that your feelings
are real, and that they're OK.
Anytime someone goes
through something like this,
they're going to feel
things like that.
So don't feel any badness
about it or any guilt.
Instead, feel of
self-compassion,
that feeling of you're OK.
You're taking care of yourself.
And feel what you need to feel.
At the right time, your
own heart's intuition
will begin to prompt
you on when it's
time to move on, when
it's time to shift and go
another direction.
And that is so personal to
each individual and their type
of relationship that they and
the whole situation, that it's
difficult to have a panacea or a
prescriptive formula for things
like that.
>>LISA: That's
important, absolutely.
>>MARTIN: It's a very
sensitive situation.
>>LISA: So Cathy on
Twitter is asking
about some practices that would
allow someone to reconnect
with their heart intelligence.
Back to the heart
intelligence field, so let's--
OK.
>>MARTIN: We're going to share
some of those in a few minutes.
>>LISA: OK, good.
>>MARTIN: And we're also
going to demonstrate
some technology called the
emWave technology we developed
at HeartMath that
helps to measure
the quality of
communication taking
place between our
heart and our brain.
And we're going to
show you some of that.
But right now, I can say
for everyone listening,
let's all try to listen
from this place right now.
Let's do it together right now
and just shift your attention
right here to the area in the
center of your chest, just
called heart focus.
And you can feel the
energy sort of moving
from here down to here in
the center of your chest.
The second thing you can
do is to go to what's
called heart-focused breathing.
Breathe naturally and
normally but a little deeper
than you normally would.
And as you do that,
try to imagine
that that breath is
coming right in and out
to where you have your focus
in the center of your chest.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: And do that
for a few breaths.
And then, and this is
the most important step,
try to feel a
positive emotion that
could be something like the love
or care you have for someone
or some thing in your life.
It can be just a
feeling of appreciation
for the good things
in your life.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MARTIN: I can appreciate
right now being here with you
and being here at Gaiam and
having an opportunity to share
what we do at HeartMath
and Institute of HeartMath
with so many people.
>>LISA: And I appreciate
what you do there.
>>MARTIN: And it could
also be a feeling
of just good old
well-being, like life's OK.
>>LISA: All is well.
>>MARTIN: And that'll make
even the show and listening
to the show a
different experience.
>>LISA: So as we're doing this,
our resonance in our heart
is changing right
now and the frequency
and the literal frequency
of our heart's emotions
are emitting a energy
wave pattern that goes out
from us that goes to the
people that are watching,
that goes to other countries.
It goes out and
beyond the planet?
>>MARTIN: Absolutely.
When we do a technique like
that and we do it sincerely,
we enter a state
called coherence.
The medical term is
psychophysiological coherence.
What that means is that's
when all this heart
brain communication
information exchange
is working together
harmoniously.
Coherence is a wonderful state.
It is a state where the body
systems are all synchronized
and working in harmony.
They're synchronizing really
to the rhythms of the heart.
And less energy is being wasted.
It's a very highly
efficient state.
It's also a state accompanied
by sustained positive emotions.
You trigger it by
doing what we just did.
Try to feel appreciation
or love or care
for something in your life.
That begins to trigger
the coherent state.
And then once you're
in that state,
those type of
feelings and emotions
come more easily to you.
Coherence is a state that's
highly observant and aware.
It is calm and balanced.
It's arrived at through
things like our prayers,
our meditations, our
walks in the woods,
times with our children, our
grandchildren, or whatever.
But it's also a
highly aware state.
It's kind of like
what athletes get
into when they're in the zone.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: It's also a flow state
when you have more of a flow
as you move through the
daily events of life.
So it's a flowing
kind of state that's
highly observant and aware
but yet calm and balanced.
And that's a measurable state.
And we're going to show you
some information about how
that's measured very soon.
But it's a measurable state.
And a lot of these
heart-centric techniques
that we have at
HeartMath are designed
to increase your coherence, so
that you enter a state where
you have the ability to
make better decisions,
to relate to people
differently, to better regulate
your emotions, not suppress
them but to better make
emotional choices that make
sense in terms of resilience,
in terms of adding quality
to your life versus draining.
>>LISA: And coherence is
the state where also it
increases your immunity, where
your hormonal levels balance
out, where you're
able to think clearer?
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
We've done some things,
some studies around that.
People being through HeartMath
training, for example,
and one study, a very
significant study,
decreasing the stress
hormone cortisol about 23%
while increasing the anti-aging
hormone DHEA by 100%.
>>LISA: Oh, we're about to
increase your DHEA and NIH
right now.
We're going to
take a quick break.
When we come back, we're going
to do an exercise where you're
going to be to see this
frequency on the monitor,
on the computer monitor
here and see how this
is effective in real time in
a very short amount of time
as well that you can
do as well at home.
We'll be right back.
This is Lisa Garr.
You're listening to
"Gaiam Inspirations."
Welcome back to
I'm Lisa Garr.
And we are live right here
from the Gaiam studios
here in Boulder, Colorado.
This is my guest Howard Martin.
And we're talking
about reducing stress
and increasing coherence.
We've talked a little bit
about the scientific response
between the heart and the brain.
And now what we're
going to do is
we're going to go into a brief
exercise here on actually
how to achieve this state
of coherence otherwise known
as balance, the peak performance
state, that optimum state.
What I'd like to know from
you since this is a live show
and that you can please give
us your comments via Facebook
and Twitter is to let
us know how you do this.
How do you right now
reduce stress in your life?
What techniques do you do?
I'd like to hear
from you and find out
what's working for you
out there and maybe
what's not working for you.
And in the meantime, we're going
to do a live demonstration here
where I'm going to be thinking
of some stressful thoughts,
which is--
and I want you to do this
along with us as well.
And we're going to
see how that registers
and what the feedback is
directly on the monitor.
And this is going to
happen in real time.
>>MARTIN: Before we do that,
let me explain the heart rhythms
and what people are
going to be looking at.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>MARTIN: We can
measure coherence
by looking at changes
in our heart rhythms.
And that's a little
different than heart rate.
Heart rhythms are the
beat to beat changes
between every single heartbeat.
And when those beat to
beat changes are happening,
very interesting patterns occur.
Heart rate variability is the
name of the science behind it.
Heart rate variability is
influenced by everything
from movement to speech.
Lots of things create these
subtle changes and variations
in our heart rate.
One of the things that
researchers didn't really
look at for a long time,
Institute of HeartMath
researchers did, was the effect
of emotions on heart rhythms.
Emotions affect them.
So we were able to
make a correlation
between changes in our heart
rhythms and what coherence is.
We analyzed lots and lots of
heart rate variability data
and learned what was
optimal and what was not.
So for example, if
you are experiencing
a lot of stressful
emotion, your heart rhythms
will generally be very
jagged and irregular.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: There will be a lot
of speeding timing changes
going on, speeding up, slowing
down, speeding up, slowing
down.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: So the pattern
looks like an earthquake.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: Now when you
align yourself with heart,
bring in that
heart intelligence,
and you begin to improve that
heart brain communication,
you'll see a pretty
sine wave like pattern.
>>LISA: So it's more regular?
>>MARTIN: And that's
what it looks like.
Yeah, it's speeding up,
speeding up, speeding up, then
naturally slowing down.
Viewers can now see on
the screen what heart rate
variability data looks like.
In the top view,
you have someone
in the Institute of
HeartMath research labs
experiencing a feeling of
frustration and emotion.
You see the pattern is showing
a lot of timing changes
happening, speeding
up and slowing down.
That's only 200 seconds of time.
But there's a lot of
timing changes going on.
The bottom graph is the
same amount of time.
And it's the same person.
Now they've shifted what?
To feeling appreciation.
So now they've gone
from a stressful emotion
to a heart-related
positive emotion.
And you see the sine
wave like pattern.
That sine wave like
pattern is what
coherence looks like when
you measure it in the body
through looking
at heart rhythms.
>>LISA: And she just
changed her feelings?
Now are thoughts and
feelings different?
>>MARTIN: Yeah, of course.
Emotions are things
you really feel.
A thought can be just a thought.
It can be-- a thought
related to itself
doesn't have much power unless
it has emotion added to it.
You think about it.
If you're feeling
frustrated, that's one thing.
You add emotional energy
to that, what do you feel?
Anger.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: You can turn
that around though.
You might be feeling kindness.
And you add some real emotion to
that, and you have compassion.
So it's the emotion added to
the thought that really creates
what we actually experience.
>>LISA: It amplifies it.
OK.
>>MARTIN: Now once we understood
a lot about heart rate
variability, we
recognized its importance
at helping people train
themselves to be more coherent.
So we created what's called the
emWave technology, E-M-W-A-V-E.
And it comes in a form where
you have a little handheld unit
that measures your
coherence level.
It shows you whether you're in
low, medium, or high coherence.
>>LISA: Oh, great.
>>MARTIN: Low is normal.
Medium is much improved.
High is that sine
wave like pattern
where you're really coherent
and in that area where
you'd be in the zone
of high performance.
The handheld can be used
portably, taken anywhere.
The little light on
top will tell you
what coherence level you're in.
And you practice
techniques to learn
to increase your coherence.
>>LISA: So you obviously
know when you're stressed
because you would hit
this thing, it would--
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
>>LISA: Right.
I mean, most people know
when they're stressed out.
But the idea is to
measure for coherence.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
>>LISA: Got it.
OK.
>>MARTIN: So you're actually
using it as a training device
to improve your coherence level.
Nobody needs a device
that says, I'm stressed.
I'm not stressed.
What they need is
the technology that
can help train them
to move beyond it.
And that's what this does.
>>LISA: Practice.
OK, great.
>>MARTIN: Now you can plug
this into your computer.
There's software here,
which we're going
to use right now with Lisa.
And what we're going
to have Lisa do
is connect this little
ear sensor to her earlobe.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: This plugs into the
USB connection in the computer.
It runs on any computer.
>>LISA: OK, and you
can do this at home
too with just your
thoughts and so forth.
But we're going
to see how it's--
>>MARTIN: Yeah, sure.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: So connect up,
get a good connection there.
OK.
Now what I'm going to do
is I'm going to start this.
And we're going
to see really soon
is we're going to see Lisa's
heart rhythm patterns come up
on the screen in real time.
>>LISA: They'll
be off the charts.
>>MARTIN: It's
calibrating to her.
>>LISA: It's going to
look like the flat irons.
>>MARTIN: Then
we're going to see
these little bars begin to move.
The red is low coherence.
Blue is medium.
Green is high.
And those change
every five seconds
as she goes through various
changes in what she is actually
feeling.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: OK?
So there's Lisa's heart
rhythms coming up in real time
on the screen.
>>LISA: All right, OK.
>>MARTIN: So, Lisa,
I want you to as much
as you can just go to
like a normal state.
Like you're not doing anything.
You're just hanging out.
>>LISA GARR: This
is normal for me.
>>MARTIN: I know.
You don't have a normal state.
>>LISA: I don't have normal.
>>MARTIN: You have like--
>>LISA: I'll calm down.
>>MARTIN: OK.
Just a normal state.
You can see her pattern is
kind of jagged and irregular.
Now I want you to think
about some things that
are going on right
now that could
be a little stressful for you.
It could be something related
to your job, something
related to the schedule.
I know you have a busy schedule.
>>LISA: Missing a flight.
Yeah, all that.
>>MARTIN: You have to
get a flight tonight.
You have to do a
radio show tomorrow.
And there's a lot
of things going on.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MARTIN: You have that and
your personal life as well.
So think about that.
Feel what that feels
like to you right now.
>>LISA: OK.
I'd rather not.
>>MARTIN: Well, I know.
Just feel it just
for a second so we
can see what that looks
like on the emWave.
>>LISA: OK.
All right.
So OK.
>>MARTIN: OK?
Now what I'd like
you to do is practice
that same little technique that
we just did a few minutes ago.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: I'd like you to
close your eyes, if you would,
this time.
And I'd like you to
slow down a little bit
and shift your
attention to the area
in the center of your chest,
the area of the heart.
That's heart focus.
Now I'd like you to do your
heart-focused breathing,
naturally, normally, but
deeper than you normally would.
Pretend as if the breath
is flowing in and out right
through the center
of your chest.
That's called
heart-focused breathing.
Just keep doing what
you're doing, Lisa.
You're doing great.
Now let's add step three,
the most important step.
Feel the positive
emotion as best you can.
Make it a general process.
Don't force it.
Just try to feel the
positive emotion.
Maybe it's thinking about your
daughter Kyla and the love
and care you have for her.
And just try to feel that
feeling that you have
when you're with her.
>>LISA: Her sweet little face.
>>MARTIN: Her sweet
little face, just
see that and feel
it and continue
with your heart-focused
breathing and your heart focus.
Now Lisa's doing great.
For those of you
that are watching,
you can see her heart
rhythm patterns.
Down on this lower
right hand corner,
you see that she's
changing from 37% she's
been in local coherence,
which is normal.
30% in medium coherence.
And she is 31% of
the time so far
on camera in a live television
show in the high coherence
state.
She is making the shift.
The emWave is just
picking up what's
going on inside her body.
She's doing it herself.
This is an empowering
technology,
so lifestyle enhancing
empowering technology
that she's able
to use now to help
train herself to know with
this coherent state feels like.
So she can recreate it in
the midst of a busy day.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>MARTIN: That's
what she's doing.
So let's stop and talk
about what we see here.
>>LISA: That was really cool.
And the most powerful
thing about that is that,
did you see how fast
I was able to do that?
And this is the
second time I've done.
And the really cool thing is
that my coherence level already
increased.
So just by practicing
that twice now,
I already became higher
on the coherence scale.
>>MARTIN: That's right.
See, over here is
where you started.
And this is where you
have your normal pattern.
You're in the midst of
your an interview, right?
>>LISA: Frenzy.
>>MARTIN: And then
here, we begin
to move into the technique.
And you do your heart
focused breathing.
And then you started
adding the positive emotion
about right in here.
And what that's happening is
it's creating that sine wave
pattern that we saw in
the previous graph of what
coherence looks
like in your body.
Now what I want you
to know about this.
There are many
benefits to coherence.
But one of the major
benefits is this.
Stress and conherence
can't be in the same room.
>>LISA: At the same time, right?
Mm-hmm.
>>MARTIN: So coherence can
cancel out a lot of that stress
that we experience.
And this is important
for everybody
listening and viewing
to knows is that, how
do you manage your stress?
Well, one way to look
at that would be you
learn to increase
your coherence.
And you do that by
making emotional shifts
with inside yourself.
>>LISA: So coherence is
the antidote to drama.
Coherence is the
antidote to stress.
antidote to anger.
It's the antidote to many
things, many things that
cause us stress in our lives.
>>MARTIN: And coherence
is an aspect of heart.
It goes back to the
things we've all
learned about heart
over the years,
about a change of heart
changes everything.
Things like that.
This is given
empirical understanding
of that whole process.
>>LISA: OK, so let's make
this practical for people.
So Kristin from
Facebook is saying,
how does she get
in a positive state
if she's reluctant
to doing something.
So she's in reluctance.
She has to do.
How does she get to this state?
>>MARTIN: OK.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: There's
a state that you
can get to that's sort of an
interim but very powerful.
And it's a state
that we call neutral.
And neutral, that sounds
kind of bland, like neutral.
You know?
Well, neutral is a place that's
highly observant and very aware
but not yet deciding.
You know?
It's being neutral.
It's kind of like in a car when
you shift gears on a stick--
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: --you have
to go through neutral
to go from one
gear to the other.
So you're suspending that.
You're reluctant to do it.
But at the same time, you
know you're going to have to.
So you find this neutral
place inside yourself
where you're neutralizing
some of the dread or some
of the drama associated
with having to do it.
It sets the stage for the
shift to occur within our self.
So there are many things
in life we can't just--
>>LISA: Control, right.
>>MARTIN: Control and shift.
And as I said earlier, I'm both
an optimist and a pragmatist,
right?
Pragmatically
speaking, there are
things that come up, depending
upon the emotional charge
associated with that, depending
upon the history of the emotion
associated with it,
that just aren't
going to shift just like that.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: But we
work towards that.
And there's progress
we can make.
And the journey is
shorter than people think.
>>LISA: Exactly.
One of my friends who's
a motivational speaker
speaks all over the world that
I interviewed on my radio show,
and he said, all over the world,
he goes to different audiences
and asks, what is the number
one thing that you want?
Consistently across the world,
it's more focus, more focus.
Even above wealth and
relationships, it's focus.
And so this is a way to
achieve that type of focus.
This is a way to get to that
but in such a shorter amount
of time, which I really love.
Because in a weird
way, it appeals
to the whole instant
satisfaction.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
>>LISA: But it's in
the reverse effect.
So now, what does something
like this do on a global scale?
>>MARTIN: Well, gosh, part
of HeartMath and Institute
of HeartMath's
initiative is something
called the Globe Coherence
Initiative, which I'm
a steering committee member of.
You mentioned that earlier.
This is a great project.
It's bringing people together
from all around the world.
We have people that are
members of the Global Coherence
Initiative from over
85 countries now.
It's a science-based
initiative designed
to utilize the power of our
collective love and care
and heart to effect changes in
the world in a positive way.
>>LISA: Great.
>>MARTIN: There are
many organizations that
are doing something similar.
And we applaud
all those efforts.
Ours is you find it
at glcoherence.org.
Membership is free.
>>LISA: Great.
>>MARTIN: And what we do is
we offer coherence building
suggestions and techniques.
Although, we recognize
and acknowledge and accept
any belief system and any
methodology somebody's using.
But what we're trying to do
is to bring people together
to create a more coherent
community of many thousands
of people, to use
that collective care
and our intention
to effect changes
in the energetic
fields of the planet.
The thing can impact
society in a positive way.
>>LISA: Intention's a
powerful word there too.
Because you can really,
with this field that's
emanated from our heart space,
you can intend in that field.
And I always say it has to
be with goodwill, of course.
So to be able to intend
forward with helping
with natural disasters,
people that are in war
torn areas, poverty, hunger,
clean water, all of that
can be affected with these--
>>MARTIN: That's right.
>>LISA: Really? with.
These thought patterns?
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
We think so.
Now wouldn't it be nice if
we knew that for sure, right?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MARTIN: That's part of
why we're bringing science
to this which is one
of the things that's
part of what HeartMath does.
Researchers at the
Institute of HeartMath
have developed technology that
can measure subtle changes
in the Earth's energetic field.
So the Earth is a living system.
It produces fields too.
The two primary fields
are the geomagnetic field,
which a compass measures.
There's also a field know
called the ionosphere,
which is a protective layer
just above the atmosphere.
These energetic
fields, again, are
part of the Earth
as a living system.
They are protective
fields that shield us
from things like solar
radiation and solar winds
and cosmic rays.
Without these fields,
life doesn't exist.
>>LISA: They're
measurable, these fields?
>>MARTIN: They're measurable.
Yeah.
And they change and
fluctuate all the time.
So it's very complex science.
But the technology
that has been developed
is a technology that can measure
subtle changes in these fields.
We will eventually have 12
monitoring sites positioned
strategically around the world.
Today, we have three, one
in northern California,
one in the United Kingdom,
and one in Saudi Arabia.
Two more are coming
soon, northern Canada
and New Zealand.
>>LISA: What's the
difference between what
they're measuring in these
various parts of the world?
>>MARTIN: Well, we don't know.
I mean, we're looking
at changes that
are feeding back to our lab.
And they do fluctuate.
As I said, there's
a lot of science
to understand the
natural things that
go on that affect the fields.
What we're really trying to
look at is a hypothesis we have.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: The hypothesis
is that strong emotion,
collective emotion, generated
by humanity, whether that's
positive or negative,
has a measurable impact
on these fields.
Now think about that.
If we can make a causal
link between emotion
and what people are
feeling at a mass level
and impact on a field that
the Earth produces itself,
that's a heck of a connection
that has never been made.
You know?
And then if we can learn to
harness that in a certain way,
to bring about more
collective coherence
through things like
the Global Coherence
Initiative and our members.
And increase that coherence
individually and collective,
and then use that
through intention,
through heart-based intention,
to impact the fields in a way
that those fields will
then impact society
in a positive way.
>>LISA: How many
people are we talking?
Like how many people would it
need to create world peace?
>>MARTIN: Well, certainly to
facilitate the ongoingness
of unfolding world
peace, for example,
we think about 350,000
people who are operating
at another level of coherence.
You know, they've increased
their own coherence level.
350,000 can make a
heck of an impact.
>>LISA: That are practicing.
>>MARTIN: That's
one of our goals.
And of course, using the
emWaves and things like that
can help train people to get to
that next level of coherence.
And really, we have a
lot of people involved
in this that are
on our committees,
like Gregg Braden
and Lynne McTaggart
and Jack Canfield and Marci
Shimoff, people like that.
And as Jack said to
me one day, he said,
this could be the
greatest experiment
in the history of
the world to prove
that all of our
thoughts, our prayers
and intentions or meditations
have been making a difference
and have an energy
that goes out.
>>LISA: Which is exactly why
we wanted you on Gaiam TV
because we wanted to
get this information out
to people watching
to say, first of all,
you can make a difference
in your own life, which
will impact your families
and your relationships
and your work and your health.
Taking that to the next level,
you can make a difference.
I mean, you really can
be the solution and part
to a bigger whole.
You can make a big difference.
>>MARTIN: That's
a great summary.
We have a program for
people to learn HeartMath
from their home.
It's an online program with
interactive phone calls
and things.
But it's called heart mastery.
The tagline to that is
find your heart purpose,
help create a better world.
So it's both, like you said.
It's like how do we
improve ourselves?
>>LISA: Starting here.
>>MARTIN: How do we
reduce our stress?
Because if we don't do that,
then all this other stuff
is just aspiration.
But we have to deal
with the reality of what
we're going through day to day.
But we can take it beyond that
in the collective consciousness
and all the way into something
like Global Coherence
Initiative, which is one of the
things I really love about all
the work that my
colleagues at HeartMath
do is that we take it
from down here to up here.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MARTIN: And as Doc
Childre has a line
he has used for years about
we try to bring things
from sky to street.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MARTIN: From the understanding
of the philosophies
and the spirituality and things
like that but to ground it out
into places that can make
a difference in the quality
of a human being's existence.
>>LISA: I would love our
viewers to play along here.
I want to do another,
if we can, an ease
technique, another technique.
And I want you all to experience
this with us if you can
and then comment back to
us on Facebook and Twitter.
Let us know.
We're just going to
do a quick exercise.
So just get into a place where
you can relax a little bit.
Close your eyes.
Howard is going to take
us through this technique.
And when you open
your eyes, I want
you to give us your feeling.
What happened?
>>MARTIN: So here's the thing.
This is a technique
that I use a lot.
It's simple again.
We have simple
techniques at HeartMath
that have been reduced
from complexity to fit
the pace of modern living.
But if you think about
different emotions
as frequencies of
energies, there's
a difference between
what care feels like
and what appreciation
feels like.
>>LISA: Interesting, yeah.
>>MARTIN: In this
case, what we're
talking about is
a feeling of ease.
Let me tell you what ease is.
It uses really this--
it's an energetic frequency
that you can access.
That gives you the
ability to use the heart
to help guide the mind and
emotions as we navigate
daily life.
So he's bringing the heart
back to play to that.
And heart's perspective
and opinion on that.
It's a flow state really.
It's more of a
flowing state that
helps to take the rough
edges off of life,
takes the corners off of life.
>>LISA: Sounds good.
>>MARTIN: It begins
to give us the ability
to flow and have more of
a relationship to life
that's less stressful and
less edgy and less resistant
and all that.
It's a doorway really
into a new intelligence
we have within ourselves.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: And it's
very simple to do.
So let's do it
together right now.
>>LISA: OK.
Yeah, yeah, let's
do it together.
>>MARTIN: Step one is to
really go ahead and acknowledge
whatever stress you're feeling.
It's not bad to have stress.
We all have it.
So go ahead and acknowledge
the feelings of any stress
that you have.
They can be the angers,
the frustrations,
the disappointments, the
feelings of overwhelm,
the mental overload
people go through.
All those things would be OK.
They're all part of stress.
So the first step is
to slow down enough
to recognize that it's
going on and admit it.
>>LISA: And we can do this
in like three minutes right?
>>MARTIN: That's right.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: The second is
to focus your attention
in the area of the heart
just like you did before,
the area in the
center of the chest,
and to breathe
through that area,
the heart-focused
breathing that we did
and when you were
doing the emWave.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>MARTIN: So focus and
breathe just a little bit
through the area in the
center of the chest.
And now I'd like
you to continue with
that heart-focused breathing but
try to feel a feeling of ease.
It's a nice sort of
silky, liquid feeling,
a gentle feeling
that you can find.
It takes a little
practice to find it.
I'm still working on it,
still learning more about it
every single day, and tuning
into different aspects of ease
but just find as much of this
feeling of ease within yourself
as you can right now and just
breathe that feeling in and out
through the center
of your chest.
>>LISA: Just give yourself a
little permission to feel it.
Mm-hmm.
>>MARTIN: Just feel it.
Yeah, give yourself permission.
It's there.
It's always been there.
It's there for us.
And just feel that feeling
of ease in yourself.
>>LISA: A little bit more.
>>MARTIN: Because we're
doing this in a certain time
frame with live TV, we can't
go on with it too long.
But what I'd like
you to do is to try
to take whatever you got from
that very, very brief exercise
and to hold onto that and
to then bring it forward
into whatever you do next
in your daily activities
as we go through
the rest of our show
and then whatever you do after--
>>LISA: The rest of your day.
>>MARTIN: After your day and
your evening, wherever you are,
yeah.
>>LISA: Making dinner.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
Try to go back and
find that feeling again
and just breathe
it through the area
in the center of the chest.
I start my day by trying to
find that feeling inside myself.
Sit down for about 15
minutes with emWave
and get into the
feeling of ease.
And then as I go through my
day, I find places in my day
that I call in betweens, the
times between the meeting
and the next phone call.
>>LISA: Your
transition times, yeah.
>>MARTIN: The transition
times, driving to somewhere.
And I try to just
breathe that feeling
of ease in and out to
maintain a certain connection
to my own heart's intelligence,
to increase my coherence
and to have that frequency
or that energy of ease in me
that can help to buffer me from
stress before it even shows up.
It sort of creates a different
energetic field environment
that creates a different
situation for me in
regards to stress.
>>LISA: There's a lot
of response coming in.
Sal from Facebook says that
he feels happy and relaxed.
Jean on Twitter says
that she felt amazing.
I'm going to do it before work.
Very cool.
Very good.
>>MARTIN: That's great, yeah.
>>LISA: Bob is saying, I
go running with my dog.
I feel great afterward.
That's how he relaxes.
And so he'll do
this-- yeah, it'll--
>>MARTIN: Fantastic.
>>LISA: Put you-- will
it put him in a zone?
>>MARTIN: Well, yeah,
it certainly helps.
He's already going into
more of a coherent zone
because he enjoys that
walk with his dog.
But if he preps,
prepares for that
walk by doing the
ease technique,
he can enhance that
experience even more.
>>LISA: I really truly
want you to experience
this more and more as you go
throughout the rest of your day
tomorrow.
Just remember this.
Remember that in just a
period of three minutes,
you can achieve a
state of coherence that
puts you in that place
of a heart space really.
And you can make
clearer decisions,
improve your immunity.
You can lower your
blood pressure.
There's so many
different effects
that come with this
on a health level
and then on a global
level, as you've seen.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
>>LISA: Howard, thank you
so much for joining me.
>>MARTIN: It's been too briefly.
So you're wonderful.
Thank you so much, yeah.
>>LISA: I know.
I know.
It went so-- it always
goes so fast because we're
having such a good time.
We're expanding time here.
>>MARTIN: Yes, we are.
>>LISA: So thank you so much.
And thank you so much because
it is all the comments that you
gave back to us here that
makes this show great
and makes it possible
and so forth.
So thank you very much.
And you can always
watch a replay of this.
And if you go to
GaiamTV.com, you
can share it with your friends.
You can watch it over again.
You can experience
the techniques again.
And also, if you
go to GaiamTV.com,
you can sign up for a
free trial membership.
And you can see the full
90 minute presentation
with Howard Martin where we go
deeper into these techniques,
and you can learn so
much more from that.
So that's by going
to GaiamTV.com.
Thank you so much.
And thank you so
much for watching.
Until next time, I invite
you to stay inspired.